Every year the core developers meet to discuss and propose the major changes and trends in Python itself.
This invite-only conference of about 50 people happens inside PyCon in the US. Because it's private,
we rarely get detailed looks inside this event. On this episode,
we have Seth Michael Larson here to give us his account of the sessions and proposals.
It's a unique look into the zeitgeist of CPython. This is Talk Python to Me, episode
275, recorded August 22nd, 2024.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy. Follow me on
mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy, and follow the podcast using @talkpython, both accounts over at fosstodon.org.
And keep up with the show and listen to over nine years of episodes at talkpython.fm.
If you want to be part of our live episodes, you can find the live streams over on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at talkpython.fm/youtube and get notified about upcoming shows.
This episode is sponsored by Posit Connect from the makers of Shiny.
Publish, share, and deploy all of your data projects that you're creating using Python.
Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quatro, Reports, Dashboards, and APIs.
Posit Connect supports all of them. Try Posit Connect for free by going to talkpython.fm/posit.
And it's also brought to you by us over at Talk Python Training. Did you know that we have over
150 hours of Python courses? Yeah, that's right. Check them out at talkpython.fm/courses.
Hey, Seth. Welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
>>Hey, Michael.
>>Awesome to have you here. I'm really excited to get a look into the zeitgeist of the core
devs and the people building Python for us through the Python Language Summit.
>>Yeah, let's do it.
So we're going to talk about the 2024 Language Summit that happened in Pittsburgh.
It's like an embedded mini conference inside of PyCon, which is smart rather than trying to travel
all over. But before we get into that and all those things, I know you've been on the show not
too long ago, but for those who may have missed your introductions, who are you?
What do you do for Python these days?
>>I'm Seth Larsen, and I've been working at the Python Software Foundation for a little over a
year now as the security developer in residence. And so that means that I do a lot of stuff
related to security just for the entire Python ecosystem. That's CPython, pip, packaging
ecosystem, like outwardly facing things for PyPI, maybe not as much the internals. I leave that for
Mike Fiedler, the PyPI safety and security engineer. And I maintain a lot of open source
projects specifically in like the HTTP and internet space. So like requests, urllib3,
TrustStore, things like that.
>>Oh, awesome. Yeah. Thanks for everything you're doing there. And how's the role working out? I
know this is one of, you were the first person in this role, like officially, right? Is that true?
>>That is true. Yeah. I was the first security oriented hire at the PSF. It's been going really
great. I mean, I feel like we've made a lot of improvements and there's a lot of exciting stuff
that I'm working on today. And I don't know, I think one of the things that also got highlighted
because this role exists, it just means that more people at the PSF and in CPython core team and
just in the Python ecosystem in general are talking more about security. And like, that's just as
important as the stuff that I'm doing day to day is that it's just, there's just more awareness of
what's happening in security.
>>Yeah. So I have two polar opposite thoughts here. One is I'm really surprised how few
significant issues there are in Python, CPython, you know, the interpreter, the runtime, the
standard library, all that. It's really rare that you get a, you know, red light splashing. Oh my
gosh, go patch your systems now. There's sometimes really minor things like this audit trail is not
completely followed under this condition, but that's not a, the pager goes off and you know,
cause you got, it's now a race. That's one thing. So that's awesome. Right. That the other is
PyPI, typo squatting, all the, all the stuff that makes Python extra good, the half million
packages and other shady things people do. And we're going to talk about this in the broader
sense, not PyPI, but you know, in the open source space of like, well, what if, what if somebody
took over a GitHub account for a little while or, or something? Yeah. So, and that's not on fire,
but that's, there are battles being waged actively there, I would say. Right. So it's a
contrast, right?
>>There, I can speak with confidence that there is malware on PyPI right now as we speak, but
like, yeah, so that's, that's the case. Right. I think it really has to do with CPython is an
incredibly mature project in like every sense of the word, like governance, security, design, all
of these things. Right. And like, there's just a huge amount of people and resources being, being
work, like working on CPython at any one moment and like contrast that to the, you said half a
million, you know, I tend to focus on the like 95% of downloads by totality. Right. Because
there, there's a lot of projects on PyPI that maybe don't have the supply chain criticality of
others. Right. But yeah, absolutely. A hundred percent. And when you, I think when you hone in
on that smaller window of projects it ends up being a much better picture than
>>I think it's, I think it's a hundred percent good picture. Honestly, there are legitimate bugs
that people have to deal with. Like, you know, maybe there's a Django release that says we
didn't validate the CRF token in, in this particular form. So you should update your Django.
Right. And that's, that's just a legit bug. That's not people attempting to do bad things.
>>I mean, I can't even take really any credit for how secure and mature CPython is. I'm such a
late addition in the life of CPython and like PyPI projects. So it really is the community. I
think it is just, there's so much investment and so much love and care happening in all these
projects that it does speak volumes. But that, I mean, that doesn't mean that we need to think
that things need to be perfect or that it's necessarily a bad thing to have a vulnerability
in a, in a project because there's projects that are even more mature than CPython that have
vulnerabilities all the time. It's totally normal. I think the important thing is just like knowing
what to do when that happens. And that's where I come in.
>>Yeah. I don't want to belabor this because you know, the security angle, while interesting to me
and central to what you're up to is not the topic, but I do think it's interesting that the White
House recently came out. I think it was the White House. It said, we recommend Python and a couple
other languages. We basically, we, we recommend memory safe languages, which did you see that
post? You must have, right?
>>I certainly did. And I actually had a, a big part of recommending that to the White House. So
when the...
>>No kidding. I had no idea.
>>Yeah. Yeah. So the, the PSF, we responded to the request for information that CISA put out or the
office of the cyber director put out, I think a year and change ago. And in that post, we recommended
CPython and Python in general as a memory safe language and went into all the details about like,
yes, it's written in C, but like the language itself, what people will actually be programming
in is Python. And we also emphasized how Python is a bridge into memory unsafe languages. And because
of all the focus on performance lately, it's actually like sometimes in some cases more
performant to keep the code written in Python as opposed to writing it in C. And so we emphasize a
whole bunch of stuff. And so I think that that had a small percentage of the reason why that was
recommended as...
>>Put it on the radar and positioned it correctly, maybe.
>>Exactly.
>>Awesome. Well, congratulations. I was just going to say that's kind of interesting, but there's
way more to it than that.
>>There's a lot happening behind the scenes. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
>>Yeah, there is. All right. Shall we talk about this language summit thing?
>>Let's do it.
>>Let's do it. So let's just, I mean, I gave it sort of a vague intro. You wrote a nice blog post
about it here on the Python blog. Just give us a sense of what the language summit, what is it for?
Is this something, is it like an open space I can go to or not?
>>No, so it is a specific space for Python core developers to use. And so I think the whole goal
of this is to get a bunch of core developers in a room together to discuss things and to kind of get
some recommendations, some ideas flowing maybe without necessarily like having the full formed
thought, right? Because like putting something out there, like completely radically changing the
direction of Python, that's a lot to put that out just publicly, whatever. And so this is like a
place to collaborate for core developers and some special guests, because not everyone that's there
is a core developer, but it is invite. So you have to like apply to go and say why you want to go.
>>Yeah. I think just folks who were, I can't remember if it was Sebastian Ramirez or Samuel
Cullinan or something around the typing thing. I remember some of those folks might've been at one
of them because they're like, wait, we can't change typing to be more performant where it
completely ignores the runtime stuff. Cause we have all these frameworks.
>>Right, right, right. Yeah. Yeah. But the language summit, it's a whole bunch of different
like submitted topics. People will talk and then there's discussion and some outcome. Maybe
there's no outcome. Maybe there's like next steps. Maybe we solve some problems within the time of
the meeting. And yeah, my job there was to actually like take down all the notes and write about it
and like publish these blog posts. Cause one of the reasons why this is allowed to be like an
invite only meeting is that there is someone who is basically taking notes and blogging about
everything that gets discussed and like what happened during the discussion so that the
community can learn about what actually happened without necessarily, you know, getting the
rawness of it, I guess.
>>Yeah. There's a real careful balance you got to strike between allowing the freedom to say
whatever without public scrutiny, but at the same time, you don't want it to be like, well, the
Python cabal met. They've decided.
>>Exactly.
>>They don't like, they don't like your idea or whatever.
>>Yeah. It's cool. So I'll point people, obviously it's going to be in the show notes. When people
at your write up, it's like a meta post, I guess. Would you say that? It's, it talks about, you
know, sort of
>>Landing page.
>>Landing page. Exactly. 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And then 9 topics and presentations that
were covered. And then the lightning talks, which is also almost like another sub meta section. So
there's a, there's a lot to explore here and there's nice write-ups on each of these. So where
should we start? And we want to kind of wrap up the conversation we were just having, because that
was actually a little bit of a topic at the language summit, right?
>>Yeah. Security was definitely a topic at the language summit. This, this was somewhat in the,
in the recent light, like the light of XZ when XZ had happened. Pablo, one of the release managers
for CPython 310 and 311, I believe brought this topic and it was basically discussing Python's
like contribution and release and all of that model in the light of XZ. So like XZ, I'll just
go over really quickly.
>>Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure people about XZ.
>>Yeah. I'm sure a lot of people have like heard of it at this point, but.
>>It was such a long game deal. It was crazy. So yeah. What is,
>>That's the scary part.
>>What is XZutils and then what is the XZutils security issue?
>>Yeah. So XZutils is a library written in C for basically processing archives of the XZ
format, which is just a compression format like, like GZIP, like, you know, any other
compression format, Zotfli, Brotli, all of those. And so this library was maintained by a single
person, big surprise. And what is relatively little known, right before all of this happened,
I would say, it was probably just adding features, fixing bugs every once in a while, make a release
and all of that. And what ended up happening is this project was identified as a project that had
very few maintainers and also through a series of reasons had a linkage to SSH. And so what
ended up happening. Yep. And so SSH was
>>If you can get into SSH and SSHD, then bad things are going to happen.
>>Yeah. So the whole end goal of this entire operation was to get access to open SSH
through like linking basically. And so what ended up happening is a bunch of fake sock puppet
accounts showed up after this loan maintainer indicated that they were having a little bit
of trouble maintaining the project and like meeting user demands. Like these sock puppet
accounts show up like days before they were actually used and all kind of in similar fashion.
And basically are pressuring this maintainer to either make them feel like they're not doing a
good job or to try to add a new maintainer. In this case, Giotan is the pseudonym that this
account used. And what ended up happening is over a year of like legitimate positive contribution
from this account, this account was added as a like equivalent to a release manager, right?
Like someone who is approving PRs and merging things and is capable of accessing the actual
archives when releases happen. And then a good chunk of time passes after that. And there's a
couple of little changes added that on their own are not an attack, but it was preparing for
an attack where essentially a small change was added into the release archives that was not a
part of the source tree that activated the entire attack chain. And then when this started to like
be pulled in downstream into things like, you know, Fedora, early versions of Red Hat, this
never went into any stable builds, but it was all the pre-releases. This ended up getting onto
people's machines and then was eventually discovered because of a very small performance
difference when logging into SSH. - Yeah, and that was somebody who wasn't even looking,
forgot the person's name, but they worked at Microsoft and they were just, I think on the
Azure team or something. And they just were like, why did this slow down a little bit? That's weird.
And they're like, wait a minute, what is this doing in here? Yeah, it was on the verge. And,
you know, what a long game. One person, one account came along and was just, you know,
I'm going to hear to help you. I'm just going to make, I'm going to try to just become your
best friend contributor. And then another one is just abusing, like mentally abusing the people.
Like, why don't you just quit? Why don't you get some more support? And then like, who, well,
let me reach out to some people who are helping me out recently. And it turns out these are like
two sides of the same coin. - Yep, exactly. - Yeah, shady. Okay. Luckily that got caught.
Cause you know, there's a lot of servers in the world that can be SSHed into and like, well,
we got, you know, public private key encryption. You can't break through that stuff long as you
don't use passwords, like you're going to be fine unless you're not. - I received a lovely email
on the day that this happened, report to the security response team for Python, because we,
of course, use the XC utils libraries because Python supports XC format as well. And I,
there was a, there was a lovely few seconds where I'm like, oh, this is either going to be
a fine day for me or a really bad day. And it ended up being a fine day. So. - That's good.
It's like, are we going to be canceling all our plans for next few weeks? - Yeah. Yep. Am I going
to have lots of questions to answer from like concerned customers, users, but it was fine.
- Yeah. Yeah. I find this kind of stuff is a lot like everything's fine. You're relaxed. Just
work's going good. Life's going good. And then, you know, something's on fire, just out of the
blue and you have this, you know, it takes your breath away moment. Like, oh, does that apply to
us as well? Because if it does, everything just changed. - Fun times. - Yeah. Really glad I did.
This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Posit, the makers of Shiny, formerly RStudio,
and especially Shiny for Python. Let me ask you a question. Are you building awesome things?
Of course you are. You're a developer or data scientist. That's what we do. And you should
check out Posit Connect. Posit Connect is a way for you to publish, share, and deploy all the
data products that you're building using Python. People ask me the same question all the time.
Michael, I have some cool data science project or notebook that I built. How do I share it with my
users, stakeholders, teammates? Do I need to learn FastAPI or Flask or maybe Vue or React.js? Hold
on now. Those are cool technologies, and I'm sure you'd benefit from them, but maybe stay focused on
the data project. Let Posit Connect handle that side of things. With Posit Connect, you can rapidly
and securely deploy the things you build in Python. Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask,
Quarto, Ports, Dashboards, and APIs. Posit Connect supports all of them. And Posit Connect comes with
all the bells and whistles to satisfy IT and other enterprise requirements. Make deployment the
easiest step in your workflow with Posit Connect. For a limited time, you can try Posit Connect for
free for three months by going to talkpython.fm/posit. That's talkpython.fm/posit. The link is in your
podcast player show notes. Thank you to the team at Posit for supporting Talk Python.
One of the talks was Python security model after this issue, the XCUtils backdoor. Tell us about
that. Yeah. So this entire talk was essentially just overviewing like, "Hey, is this possible?
Is this possible for CPython to be impacted by such an attack?" And I mean, the answer is yes,
it really is. Because if you have accounts that are willing to put years of effort into
contributing good code to CPython, right? That is enough to become a core developer likely.
And if you're a core developer, it means you can merge PRs. It means if you get two core
developer accounts promoted to this level of authorization, you can merge your own PRs with
review, right? The big focus on this talk was like, "Okay, how can we prevent this? And in the
ways that we can't prevent it, how can we be ready?" And kind of like discussing whether or not
we're ready at this point. And I think the big consensus was that if we were to discover
something like this that had already been merged into Python or had been released in Python, that
we would be okay to be able to get the word out. That sort of infrastructure already exists,
and we're not too worried about that. We're a CNA. We can create a CVE really quickly.
We can get the announcements out really quickly. We can get releases out really quickly. So in that
way, the reactive sense, we're okay. In the proactive sense, which is the more important
one, but it's also the harder one. - Yeah, because when nation states
hire people to say the next three years of your job, it's almost like-
- And it's like a team. - Like a spy, yeah.
- A team of people for multiple years. - Yes, exactly. It's like the CIA or MI6
or something, on the code side. - To be honest with you, it doesn't even
need to necessarily be nation state level stuff for this to happen because vulnerabilities in
popular pieces of software are very lucrative. You can sell them and people make a lot of money
on selling vulnerabilities to projects. So why not grow your own, right?
- Exactly. - Yeah, go ahead.
- One of the things I think is great is there's a really long release cycle,
and a staged rollout. So I don't know how many people jump in and install alpha one of some
Python, but it's pretty limited and it's not gonna make it. No, no, of course, I know,
I see you raising your hand. However, I don't see that shipping on Ubuntu's update channel or
Docker's a whole different deal. Let's not even go there. But on the main Docker images.
- Yeah, yeah. I mean, the slow rollout is definitely a big part of it, right? A lot of
people get their Python, not direct from the source, they get it from a distribution or they
get it from, if they, like Amazon Linux with Python or whatever, right? Like it's a distribution of
Python. - Or brew install or-
- Brew install Python, yeah. So a lot of people are not living on the edge. And I think that that
helps in a way. Obviously, people that are living on the edge, maybe they're the more valuable
targets, but I mean, I'm not gonna be the one to encourage that. Yeah, I don't think that,
I think the biggest defenses against this, and this was what was discussed there, was
trying to push things to be in the open. And actually, in a way, open source is uniquely
able to respond and- - Right, right, right, right.
- Defend it against for these sorts of attacks. Because if this were to happen in Windows,
for example, would we have had the almost immediate, being able to debug what the actual
attack was, how long this had been going on, what patches were bad, right? That sort of visibility
into the source code is something that was really important in being able to actually track this
thing down. And so having test files and binary files not checked into source code and instead
generated. So one of the parts of this attack that allowed it to go hidden for so long and be
checked into source code was that almost all of the attack code was hidden extremely well in a
binary file, which made it so that code reviewers- - Some of the test binary elements,
'cause if you've got a compression file utility, you've gotta have compressed files for your unit
test, right? - Exactly. So it was, basically,
these files were checked in and there's just huge binary blobs that you can't actually get your
eyeballs on to review. We talk about lots of eyeballs make for shallow bugs. Well, if the
eyeballs can't see the bugs, then you're not gonna find them. And so we talked about removing binary
files from the source code or making sure that all the binary files that are generated have a
script that allows them to be generated anytime and things like that. - Is it one of the changes,
I recently, I can't remember if this was on IPI or if this is a GitHub thing, but allowing GitHub
to be the thing that publishes directly, builds the wheels and uploads them to PyPI rather than
somebody downloading the code, building them and uploading it, which obviously that's a opaque
step there. - Yeah. So other things that tie more strongly these, whatever release artifacts are
actually ending up on people's machines to the source code. So that's, I mean, I would call that
build provenance. There's a whole bunch of different frameworks that that works under,
but yeah, build provenance, being able to tie in an artifact that's installed in your system back
to the actual source code so that when you are evaluating that artifact on whether you want to
install that on your system or deciding whether to upgrade or whatever, you can look at the source
code instead of looking at this compiled binary. That's something that I really want to focus on
for PyPI in the future, but yeah, we're not there yet. - Awesome. Yeah. 'Cause when you look at a
project, you say, well, let me see what the release is on GitHub. If you know that literally
that was the thing that compiled or got built and then that's what's on PyPI, that's a different
forensic analysis than somebody's machine. - What it ends up nice, like being nice is that it,
and this is the tough part is that I feel like a lot of people's behavior, which is to go on
GitHub and look at the diff between like tags. That's what a lot of people do, but that's not
actually what you should do. You should be looking at the diff between the artifacts. That's the
thing that's actually installed in your machine, but that's way harder to do than looking at the
tags. So adding build- - We just crowdsource it. We're all
crowdsourcing it. Like wait for somebody to scream. - In a way we are.
- I know we are. - In a way we are.
Just related to this while we're still on this topic, you talked about the, somewhere, there we
go. There's also big news around CVEs, which are official vulnerability numbering. So they're
referenced through all those cybersecurity talk and stuff. You can describe it better. So big
news is that the PSF now, and you alluded to this, is now an official numbering authority. So rather
than saying there's a problem with Python, who's going to sort of officially call this out and
write it up and so on, you guys can do that directly now, right?
- Yeah. So CVEs are basically, it's a set of identifiers and records that show, it's like a
bunch of metadata about vulnerabilities in software is what it is. And it's only one system.
There are a bunch of other vulnerability databases, but CVE seems to be the one that everyone uses or
references. And so what being a CVE numbering authority gives us is it makes it so that
someone at the PSF can operate the CVE UI and workflow and all of that to say like, "Oh,
we want to create a new CVE ID on behalf of the Python team or on behalf of the pip team."
And what that ends up meaning is that because we are part of the process, instead of having to go
to some other entity, so like Mitre or Red Hat or Microsoft, there's a whole bunch of CNAs. There's
over a hundred now, I think. Instead of going to someone else that isn't as well-versed in Python
or our release schedule or any of those things, we get to inject the knowledge that we have about
Python into all of these records, into all these advisories. And it makes it so that we don't
actually have to talk to someone else to be able to handle a vulnerability end to end.
Before, you would potentially have a reporter going to talk to someone else and getting a CVE
ID, and then they would come talk to us. And by that point, it's hard to make a determination,
and there's a whole bunch of things that have already happened, and maybe there's
messes that need to get cleaned up to make sure that it's not confusing.
So by owning the entire process, we're able to make sure that things are as little confusing
as possible, like what actually needs to be done for users when we publish these things.
Yeah, that's great. I want to move off the security angle here, because I know there's
so much more to talk about. However, you guys, have you considered or ever run any sort of bug
bounty program? We don't have a bug bounty program right now. I mean, the hard part with
a bug bounty program is it takes money. So if you would like to see a bug bounty program happening
at the PSF, get in touch with the PSF. Send an email.
Yeah, I think incentives are really aligned there. There's a lot of companies that
have this tooling at the center of their data center. So maybe.
Yeah, maybe.
Maybe, maybe we can make it happen. All right, next up, the REPL,
or the PyREPL for the Python PyREPL. What's the deal with this?
Yeah, so this was a talk that was given by a couple of different core devs. I think this
included a bunch of people, Pablo, Lukasz, and Lissandros all gave this talk. And it was about,
hey, this new REPL that's coming in Python 3.13. Here's all the cool stuff that it can do, and
how it makes the usability so much better for people. And they demoed a whole bunch of the
new features, which was really exciting. There was lots of applause showing off a few of these, like
little features. And I think that the other side of it is because this new REPL is written in
Python and not written in C, it lowers the barrier for contributions and maintenance drastically.
Before the REPL was super entwined with the parser and all of these other really low level
details of Python that a lot of people probably didn't want to get involved with if they didn't
have to, versus this where it's this completely separate and much more easy to contribute to
piece of software. Yeah. And did this come from the PyPy project? Yes, this was PyPy. And I think
that there's been some back and forth, contributing back, contributing forward, all of that, which is
also really great, right? Having one REPL shared between two different implementations. Yeah,
that's great. Just working better together, more people working on it. I always call it
PYPY because some people call Python packaging injects, PyPy, but that's also this other thing.
Anyway. It's a non-zero part of every one of my days, right? I'm sure that is. Because a lot of
the times, a significant percentage of my work as a security person is being in working groups that
are not Python related at all. And yeah, there's a lot of PyPys flying around. Yeah. You talk about
NumPy being on PyPy and you're like, okay, hold on. Hold on. Could be two different things.
There's a lot going on here. Yeah. So this is really interesting. I haven't really played
with it much. I honestly don't spend a ton of time in the bare Python REPL. Like if I'm
REPLing, a lot of times I'm in the JetBrains sort of enhanced REPL that's inside PyCharm,
something like that. But, and I think partly because there was a lot of challenges with
the bare Python REPL, right? There's no autocomplete, but worse than that was
if you've got a five line function and you want to edit it, you've kind of got to go to the top
part, hit her, like it's, it really was hard to work with blocks of code. There's no color,
things like that. Yeah. Color is the standard for, you don't have color in your terminal at
this point. Like even 2020. You've basically given up at that point. If you don't have an emoji and
you don't have color, I mean. Emojis, color, got to have like the rainbow prompt, maybe like the
logo of the thing when it starts up. A starship. I didn't even consider the ASCII art and possibly
the ASCII art in color. No, seriously though, I do think it sounds like a minor deal, but just
the readability of having highlighting and stuff. Yeah. Syntax highlighting is huge. Syntax
highlighting is like really huge. That's not a part of the current REPL, I don't think, but like
it becomes much more possible because this PyREPL exists. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. I think that like
the biggest thing, yeah, like the whole blocks of code, I just remember the demo of them showing
like, oh, you have like five lines. You have to hit up, up, up like four times. It's just like,
oh, if you mess it up, you got to start over. You got to start over and you're just, you're
just sad. You just contemplate putting it in a file instead of doing this in the REPL. Exactly.
That's why I'm not in there. I avoid being in there because it's hard. This will be really,
really great for people that are just starting Python journey. Cause I think that a lot of people
learning and starting off will use the REPL straight up instead of an IDE. And so like
having this, there was a big focus on like teachability and documenting it and making it
work the same. Like if you actually like read the post, like what the discussions were about for
like everyone is basically totally in favor. They loved it, but they wanted to make sure that this
was going to be like a consistent experience, specifically like Carol willing had this big
point about like having a consistent experience being really important for teaching Python
across different operating systems. So, yeah. And something a little bit,
a little bit better than up, up, up five times and don't get it out of order. Exactly. Yeah.
That's cool. Though, I guess one of the, I don't know if this was discussed, but one of the
challenges of this, I think is it requires, and it's not necessarily bad, but just a challenge
is I think it requires the new windows terminal rather than say cmd.exe, the older style. So it
just works out of the box on macOS and on Linux, but on windows, you got to be a little careful
about how you run it. Is that right? So I actually don't know what the current status of all of this
is because the time has marched on since these blog posts have happened. And there has been a lot
of work done on the windows side, the current team, like the team that presented this didn't
have any windows experience. And so they didn't know really how hard it was going to be. I think
that there's been a lot of strides in the windows side of things. So I think the situation's better.
I don't know offhand if cmd.exe is supported or if it's just the new windows terminal, but I,
I think it's fine. I was sitting in windows terminal. Like people need to be using that
thing anyway. It's true. It's like opening up on your Mac and just having like the bare white bash,
I guess it's Z shell these days, but just the completely, you know, non-fixed font.
Like, what is this thing that you are running? Like, you're like, the terminal is horrible.
Like, well, that thing is, but you know, you could make it a lot nicer by the way. And,
you know, it's, it's similar, trade off there, right. In the windows world. So, okay.
Interesting. Next one is, should we, should we adopt calendar versioning? We're beyond zero
verse. So that's really good, but there's been a reluctance to have Python four, but we've got
three, 12 through 13. Are we just going to have 3.1 hundred and 28 or should we come up with
something else? Right. What is calendar versioning and should we adopt it and how many digits should
it have? Yeah. So this was, presented on by Hugo, who is the new release manager for Python
three, 14 and 15, which maybe that's a little presumptive saying those numbers. cause if
this goes through, that would not be the case anymore. he's going to work himself straight
out of a job here. What's going on. Yeah. This is, this was, there were definitely jokes
about like, this is just your attempt to, to get out of being the release manager for these
releases. but yeah, that, so Hugo proposed this, what, this is kind of like a pre pep
feeling out of how this situation should be. And like trying to pare down the options, I think was
Hugo's biggest, biggest question was what should we do it? And should we pare down the options?
Cause there's a million different ways we can do calendar versioning. and yeah, I think if you
scroll down, there was like a slide that had just, you know, every single possible calendar
versioning possibility for Python and all the different languages. but yeah, calendar
versioning is like really common for programming languages and other things that are similar to
Python. and so this was basically like, Hey, we have this yearly release cycle that is been
working for a while and we're probably going to keep doing it. Should we pointing out for people
who don't know that it used to be 18 months. And so the calendar versioning would get a little
out of phase or something there, but now, now that it's yearly in the fall, it really lines
up perfectly. Yeah. And so this kind of assumes that we're going to keep doing the yearly thing,
which I'm fine with the yearly thing, but yeah, as long as we kept the yearly schedule,
it would line, like the release year would line up with whatever the, so it would be like the
ended, the one that was like most agreed upon was like three dot and then a two digit year,
or what would end up becoming a three digit year when we roll over to a hundred, assuming that
Python is still used in a hundred years. but yeah, so like that was kind of like the one that
was most palatable to core devs or people were most excited about. And I think the big reason
why switching to like a Calver year was interesting is that we have this thing called like support
lifetime. So like how long is CPython supported? How long do you get security fixes? How long do
you get bug fixes? and so being able to do the math is easier. Yeah, exactly. Like,
let me put this out to the audience. Is Python three eight supported or is it not supported?
I don't know. You got to do, you got to do math. You got to think about it. yeah,
so three seven just recently dropped support. Right. Which is crazy. Cause that seems like
a pretty new version of my mind, but it totally makes sense. but if you just knew it's
supported for how many years, six years, five years, it's five years for security releases,
I believe. Yeah. So then you're like, it's 2025. So, you know, 2020 out, it becomes a lot easier.
And there was also say like, do I have the current one, right? If you're not tracking it super
carefully, like three 11, is that the latest? Like, I don't know. I don't, I only use Python
every like once a month. What was the 2023? Oh, I see. Well, I mean, that's not the latest one. Okay.
Yeah. Yeah. So it was just an interesting conversation about figuring out what the
best potential option was. And then Hugo ended up creating a PEP and I think that's being
discussed right now. So cool. Why not 2024, why 24? Because that feels, I don't know. It just
feels like you've just point shifted what you're doing now rather than, than really clear. Cause,
you know, as a new person coming in, you don't see that and go, it's 24. So it must be 2024.
And unless you really like put together the calendar, but if it's a dot 2024, you're like,
I bet that's the year, you know? Right. Yeah. I mean, cause eventually the,
in the not too distant future, there will be a Python 3.24.
Exactly. Yeah. We'll see. So there's going to be a pepper on this. You say, in fact,
it says right here, PEP 604, right? I think it's pep. What is it like?
Well, you know, that's the, just the yearly announce. You scroll down all the way to the
bottom. It'll, I think it's like peps. Yeah. There's a lot of drafting. It just says drafting
a pep. Give that a click. I'm pretty sure there's a number 2026. There we go. Okay. Yeah. Oh,
so that's going to be a while until they released this pep. Well, so I'm just kidding. The most,
the most important part of this discussion was that the, the Python version 3.14 B B preserved
PI on, so yeah, cool. It wasn't allowed for three, three 14 to change it.
Yeah. The only thing that I can think of that you would have the two digits is that there's a lot of
code and regular expressions and junk out there that checks for that. But you know, if we talk
about some of the other stuff out there, like that's a pretty minor change, like for example,
three threaded Python. Yes. Three threaded Python. It's here. It is here. Sort of,
you know, what actually really surprised me is that when I saw this PEP come through,
is it seven or two or something like that? It said, we're going to allow free threaded Python,
which I'm going to have you explain for folks in a moment, but you're going to have to have a special
build of it. And I thought, oh, well that means if you want to play with it, you're going to have
to build your own. But I noticed that the installers now give you an option for it.
Yeah, they do. Yeah. The installers side by side install. Right. Yeah. The, what is it? I think
there's like a T that gets put onto your actual like. Yes. Python T is what you type instead of
Python. Yeah. If you want the free threaded one. Yeah. I mean, free threading is here. I mean,
there's options if you're compiling it yourself, you just enable some options. And I think I go
over that in the actual blog post too, the options that you actually use to try it out. And yeah,
free threading essentially is, it's a way to remove the GIL and move to a different like
reference counting model, object counting model. And which is quite exciting for a lot of people,
but it will, what it will end up meaning is that a lot of the packages that are written in C or
that are relying on CPython APIs will have to get either, you know, tweaked a little bit to like,
use these slightly different C APIs to make it so that they play nicely with having no GIL enabled
and with the new memory management. Yeah. It's super exciting.
And just in the ecosystem, basically. Yeah. Just because you have threads doesn't mean you get
perfect scalability across the cores. Can't remember who wrote this article. Is it Simon
Willison? Maybe who did some, yeah, I'm pretty sure it was Simon Willison who wrote one that
said, look, we're going to take an algorithm that can, is kind of embarrassingly parallel
and parallelize it. And it turned out to be something like 50% gain per core. So it was
like he had eight cores and it was four times faster with free-threaded Python than without,
which is still, if you can get your code to run four times faster, that's still really good. Right.
Yeah. But it's, it's going to have, like you said, I think it's going to have an interesting
requirement put on all the people building packages. Right. And I know when I hear people
say, I think maybe you just said like, oh, it's going to be the C extension packages that are
really going to have to deal with it because they, they'll have to do locks in their thing.
I think even in the Python code, there's certainly algorithms that have multiple steps that they'll
get some data here. They'll work with the data. They'll make some changes. Then they'll put the
data back in the same place. And even that would be subject to a race condition. Right. And I think
we're, you know, I've in long in the past did a lot of C++ I did a lot of C# and in
communities like that, people are like always focused. They're like, oh, he's kind of crazy
about two things, memory and threading. Right. And we just don't do that in Python. We just,
I think we have just leveraged the fact that the GIL gives us kind of enough coarse grain granularity,
the execution of our code that it's just not something we hit a lot. And we don't try to do
a ton of threading because it doesn't work all that well. However, this, this could expose
lots of stuff. This could put a new focus on that. Yeah, definitely. Yeah. Just having more people
using threading with Python, that that's going to be huge for finding thread safety issues.
Yeah. It's, it's just really exciting. I think that, and there's another blog post, a completely
separate one that talks about like the C API. And there was some mention about like free threading
and evolving the API so that it's a lot easier to use from a three, a free threading perspective.
So like there's a ton of work happening in here to make this as easy, a hopefully brief
kind of split in the ecosystem and then have it converge together. I think that's like the
overall plan is like, Hey, we gotta, we gotta have a way that if this is really not working out,
we can go back. But if it is working, we need a way that we can actually land this thing as the
default. Right. Right. Right. And the PEP discusses this as like, we're gonna, we're gonna see how it
goes, which is really interesting. But I think it's not breaking in the sense that you can't
still run Python three with the thing that you've got. You just might not be able to enable this
free threading aspect of it for some time. Whereas from two to three, it's like, you cannot
run this library on three period. There's no scenario which this is going to work because
it needs to take into account this and it doesn't. And so it's out. So I feel like there's more time
and space to evolve it. And you could say, well, in this space, you know, in this data science
section of the world, we use these seven libraries and we're going to work and make them
compatible so that we can get way better performance or, you know, we're going to work
to make sure that FastAPI and pedantic support it really well so that we can scale our web servers
better. Yeah. No, this will be huge for, for like web and, and data. I think that a lot of people
are excited for this for a really good reason. Yeah. I totally agree. I totally agree. Okay.
So this is a big deal. It's coming in three 13, but you've got to run Python T for now.
Yeah. It's a three 13, but it's also available in the pre-releases. The first release candidate
for three 13 is out. So give it a test. If you haven't given it a test, give it a test.
Yeah. Very cool. All right. What, what one do we want to talk about next? We got just a couple
more minutes to cover. We've got, what about Python and mobile? I think that one's, I know
there's the, the black Swan talk that Keith Russell McGee gave and Carol Willing also sort of
shouted out. Like there's a couple of places that are really, really important computationally in
the world that Python kind of isn't, we should have it there. And those number one has got to
be mobile, mobile and front end for me, mobile and front end are the two. And like a far distant
behind that is like, could I get a single binary out of my app that I can give to someone? That's
a different, that also is in there, but it's, it's like not as important as, Hey, I want to,
I want to build some mobile apps. Can I use PI? You know, I want to learn that with an easy
language. Chinese, ask me something else. Yeah. Yeah. Right. Like next question.
Yeah. So this was, this was a, it's almost almost like a big status update on where Python is in the
mobile space, which is really exciting because they've made a ton of progress on getting like
actual tiering of support for these platforms. So if you don't know, Python has a like platform
support tiers where it's like tier one is like X 86 Linux, right? Like that's a 90% of PI PI
downloads are, are that like, yeah, probably want to support that one. And then as things like Mac
OS, you know, X 86 and arm and all of that. Right. And then lower down there's tier two, which is,
you know, the platforms that they have people that are interested in them. But if those people
were to go away, then we wouldn't actually have a way to support them. And tier three is like even
more so. Right. So having tier three support for Python, for both Android and iOS for three 13,
like that's super exciting. It means that these things are getting actively tested.
There's like integration testing on real platforms and that there's people that care about it that
are fixing bugs. And this is exactly what you need to get your platform supported. And so this is all
being provided by Anaconda funding this project and be aware. Okay. Yeah, that's right. They are,
you'll be aware and Keith has been on this for a long time, but Anaconda have come along and
put more time and energy behind it in terms of funding and people as well. I'm not sure,
but certainly in funding, that's awesome. Yeah. So I think this was, it was both a
status report and also kind of trying to figure out how these sorts of platforms can get tested
more easily and like actually not having constant breaking because these platforms are so different
from, you know, what almost every other core developer is using to develop a Python or a lot
more limited in terms of capabilities and like lockdown and the security perspective too.
And they have no regard for backwards compatibility. I'd so frustrating. I, I got,
I, you know, I have mobile apps for the talk Python courses that are in both iOS and Android
app stores and I'll get messages like, Hey, dear developer, if we see that you're built against
three-year-old APIs, if you don't rebuild and republish your app in the next six months,
we're taking it out. The last one I had to do this for was Google. I'm like three,
three years. Okay. Can we, no, it can't get any better compatibility than that. Like I just got
to keep re-uploading the same thing, even if there's no changes. Like, so, you know, that's
just a different mentality of like, ah, we changed all that. We don't like that anymore.
Yeah. Luckily I'm, I'm actually not sure how affected Python in particular is by things
like that. Cause that's like utilizing APIs, like mobile SDK APIs versus like the operating system
of the phone, which, yeah, right. Like people would build apps with Python and then they would
be subjected to these emails. And it's not even that I was necessarily using any of those APIs.
It's just like, we see you're compiled against the wrong version. So try again, you know?
Yeah, no, the, yeah, the, the difficulties that I've at least from, from this talk have figured
out is that like these platforms are just a lot more locked down. So like a lot of system calls
won't be available that the test suite like assumes are available always. And sure.
It's almost like a circuit Python sort of deal, but not that extreme.
It's like, yeah, it's like somewhere in the middle and figuring out how to all work together happily
and develop on this similar code base that has all these different target platforms.
Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely. Awesome. Well, I'm, I'm really excited. I'm all here for it. If
three years ago, I think it was when we started working on those mobile apps, if I could have
used Python in a really solid way, a hundred percent, those apps to be built in Python, but
just, there's so many, so much tooling and stuff around. Oh, you got to create a signed APK before
you upload. There's a lot of stuff going on there. And so hopefully they, they get that. That would
be, be a game changer and just, you know, it's not on, it wasn't here. Almost surprised me that it
wasn't here, but front end stuff, WebAssembly, PyScripts, Pyodide, all those things I think are
in that same realm. Although they can just kind of ship stuff to the web because there's no gate
keepers, but still. Yeah. Was that mentioned anywhere during the summit that just didn't make
a post? No, Wasm was not, there was no topic about Wasm specifically at, at this language summit.
Yeah, sure. I think there was the previous year. Previous year there was. Yeah.
Should we make PDB better? Does this matter? Are people using PDB? What do you think?
Yeah. So this, this was all about, PDB is Python's debugger for people that don't know. If you've
never used it, it lets you kind of like drop into, set a break point in Python and then drop into
that exact spot with all the context and everything, which is really. At a lower level. Yeah.
At a lower level than VS Code or PyCharm. Right. Exactly. Like seeing all these like super
internals of Python, if that, if that's something that you really need. Right. And so this was a
talk that was mostly about, okay, we're, we have PDB, but now we have all of these new models,
like free threading and all of that. And also we're being a little bit held back by backwards
compatibility. There's like a specific, really specific point where because of backwards
compatibility reasons and PDB is a part of the Python standard library, it becomes difficult
to break backwards compatibility, even if it would mean you get a bunch of really good stuff out of
it. You can't always do that because people are depending on it. And I think that the, yeah,
the recommendation was maybe we should develop this outside of the standard library so we can,
you know, break backwards compatibility if it's not necessary and, and make it so that we can
support multiple versions instead of just having it be per version. And yeah. Yeah. That's, that's
a good idea. That's exactly what I was thinking. Cause you know, there's the whole dead batteries
talk like, does this still belong here? I'm not necessarily thinking this should not be in Python,
but you know, yeah. Something broken out maybe, but take that exact code, break it out, but,
you know, enhance it kind of independently. Yeah. And I think the concern from, from some people in
the room was that, Oh, if we break this out onto pipe, AI, then it would potentially mean that it
would not get the same level of contribution that PDBC is because it's part of Python. Right. Sure.
And I mean, totally valid in my opinion too, like being a part of Python is a huge, like blessing
of like, yeah, this is something important. Right. But I, I think that there's, there's other ways to
signal that that's something important. Like if you look at like my pie, my pie is underneath the
Python GitHub organization. And so maybe something like that, right. Where it's this tool that is
very actively used by core developers for development. And it is a little bit more
official than, you know, just some random person putting something up on pipe. Yeah. This is core
developers supporting this. And black is that way too, I believe, right? It is. Yeah. So maybe
something to signal just a little bit more of an official, this is a core developer tool. Here's
why you should contribute to it instead of just, you know, a random project on pipe guy, which
definitely wouldn't be in that case. It would not, it would definitely not. All right. How about,
how about a quick review of maybe some, some of the lightning talks? Yeah. Any of these stand out?
You know, obviously Rust and Python is seriously a one. Yeah. Emily's talk was, yeah. Emily's got
a good one. Emily has a really good one because, and this is like, it's, it's almost meta, right?
Because lightning talks are not submitted ahead of time. You actually have to submit them during
other people's talks, like to the list that you want to talk about this and then put together
some slides really quickly. So yeah, these talks are pretty impressive in that way,
having mere minutes, but the Emily's talk was about, it was kind of like wrapping up a theme
that was being heard multiple times over the course of the language summit. But obviously
this is a problem outside of the language summit too, which is that when someone goes to make a
prototype for a pep, they are given at least today, not a whole lot of support for doing that
prototype because it's basically like, Oh, we think that this should be developed outside of
the standard library. Initially, right? Like that's a really common determination that the steering
council comes to. And so being able to have kind of like a standardized way that people do a pep
prototype outside of the standard library. So things like creating a repo and like having all
of this existing infrastructure set up and maybe even hosting it under the Python GitHub organization
to give it some like air of officiality of like, yeah, this is something like really big is
happening here. It's not just like someone in a corner writing something right. Like giving some
more grandiosity to, to the work that's being done and not just kind of saying, Oh, go away.
Like that is the intention. Right. But that's kind of how it can land sometimes.
Right. And maybe setting up people for success, at least this is what we're going to expect from
you. If you go through this process, then you've got, you're further down the pipeline of having
that conversation for a pep. Yeah, definitely. And like, if you're
wanting to write something that is for Python, you know, you probably don't necessarily care
about like setting up these exact workflows for publishing to PyPI. Like that's just a whole bunch
of things that are in your way to actually being successful. So having that all be figured out
already ahead of time for you makes things a lot easier for you.
Yep. Yep. Yep. Let's, let's finish it out with Yuri Silvanov's presentation, efficient data sharing
between sub-interpreters. And it's interesting because we talked about free threaded Python,
but the year before the big news was sub-interpreters and Eric Snow's work. And
those are not directly competing type of things, but in a sense they're kind of competing.
Yeah. They're definitely competing for being like the, the model of how to do efficient,
you know, parallelism in Python. Yeah. Yeah. How do we isolate the stuff
so that we can avoid the guilt? We take it out and add different algorithms or do we just
make copies of the interpreter and run them in isolation, but then you have this
data sharing issue. I can't just share a pointer easily. Right. So what's this about?
Yeah. So Yuri basically came with, and this was also if you want the extended version,
Yuri also gave like an actual PyCon talk about this library that he's developed called Memhive.
What's it called? Memhive.
Like M-E-M-H-I-V-E. Yeah.
All right. Awesome. And just for everyone listening just this week, last week,
recently, all the videos of all the talks are now available on YouTube. So it's been a while
coming, but you can go watch it now. Exactly. So go watch them all. If you,
if you missed out on a talk, go watch them. But yeah, this, so this library in particular is,
it's basically a way using immutable data structures. There's this immutable data
structure called an H-A-M-T. I actually don't know what it's short for, but it's a hash,
hash array map tree. There we go. It was in the, I wrote it down. And it's essentially like a way
to have this tree that can be passed around and shared without like worrying what the other
processes, sub-interpreters are. They're not processes. The other sub-interpreters are doing
to the status structure. So it enables a more efficient and safe way of sharing data. That's
kind of like in a tree structure. And I think one, the demo that he ended up giving was about
a dictionary-like data structure where, you know, you have a million keys and a bunch of
sub-interpreter workers working on that data. And they're able to, because it is using this
immutable data structure, the modifications and changes are all safe, but it's also like super
scalable and performant. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The thing about parallelism and multi-threading is
if it's immutable, you can have many things that you want reading from the same memory. It's only
when they start writing, does it matter? So yeah. Yeah. This, this like has a way,
a mechanism to capture the rights in a way that is safe so that like the current one can see
what has been written and then the other ones aren't affected because their copy is not changed.
Okay. That sounds very interesting. We talked about the coming compatibility matrix of free
threaded Python. This won't have that issue, right? This operates in the every version of Python.
Yeah. So this, I would assume that this sort of module would be able to say like,
I am ready for a GIL free world. So that's like the mechanism that I believe CPython has,
has adopted for saying that your C module is ready for not having a gill. You actually have
to opt into it. And then that module will, will be allowed to run in a free threaded Python.
Yeah. It's something I recently learned is there's separate wield builds for free threaded
Python as well. Yeah. That's, that's interesting. Yeah. It's its own, I don't know exactly the
phrase for it, but yeah, it's own wheel tag platform target or whatever. Yeah. Yeah. Like
free threaded gets appended to Mac iOS arm 64 or whatever. Exactly. Yeah. Awesome. All right,
Seth, this has been great. How about some parting thoughts? Let's close this out with just
takeaways from, from the whole experience. Yeah. I mean, the language summit is lovely.
One of the things that's like most important to me is like this whole aspect of storytelling. And
so that's why I felt really, really happy that I was invited along to be able to tell these stories
to all of you. And I think that having all of these different narratives all in one place of
all of these huge themes about what Python is going through all at once, right? Like it's
really incredible how many different things are happening in Python all at once. And like
sometimes when you're focusing on just one or just two, you know, you don't have this huge
context of, wow, Python is changing in like at least 20 different ways all at once. And we're
somehow doing really, really well. I would say like, yeah, I have no doubt about any of any of
these huge changes that Python is going through, like to, to take it in the wrong direction. Like
I'm feeling hopeful and excited about all of them. So it's an exciting time. Yeah, I am as well. And
it is really tricky to get a picture, a holistic picture of, of the progress. Cause there's a lot
of different groups doing different things and there's no one person's or one company's job to
get somebody to come and tell that story. So yeah, thanks for giving us the insight here.
It's been awesome. Yeah. Thanks for being on the show and I'm sure we'll have you back soon.
- Yeah. Sounds good. Thanks for having me.
- Yeah. See ya.
- This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me. Thank you to our sponsors. Be sure to
check out what they're offering. It really helps support the show. This episode is sponsored by
Posit Connect from the makers of Shiny. Publish, share, and deploy all of your data projects that
you're creating using Python. Streamlit, Dash, Shiny, Bokeh, FastAPI, Flask, Quarto, Reports,
Dashboards, and APIs. Posit Connect supports all of them. Try Posit Connect for free by going to
talkpython.fm/posit. P-O-S-I-T. Want to level up your Python? We have one of the largest catalogs
of Python video courses over at Talk Python. Our content ranges from true beginners to deeply
advanced topics like memory and async. And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm. Be sure to subscribe to the show. Open your
favorite podcast app and search for Python. We should be right at the top. You can also find
the iTunes feed at /iTunes, the Google Play feed at /play, and the direct RSS feed at /rss on
talkpython.fm. We're live streaming most of our recordings these days. If you want to be part of
the show and have your comments featured on the air, be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel
at talkpython.fm/youtube. This is your host, Michael Kennedy. Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it. Now get out there and write some Python code.